Solution for  CSES-1160 (#2366)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/cses-1160.mdx

id: cses-1160
source: CSES
title: Planets Queries II
author: Dustin Miao, Michael Cao, Benjamin Qi
---

> In this problem, we are given a functional directed graph and asked $q$ queries for the minimum distance between two vertices $u$ and $v$, if it exists. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are given a functional directed graph and asked $q$ queries for the minimum distance between two vertices $u$ and $v$, if it exists. 
```

## Solution

> We will decompose the graph into several cases. Note that because each node has one outgoing edge, there must be exactly one cycle in every connected component. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Decompose the graph into several cases. Note that because each node has one outgoing edge, there must be exactly one cycle in every connected component. 
```

> Compress this cycle into a single node. Each connected component is now a tree, rooted at the cycle node. Consider a query for a path from $u$ to $v$. We will assume that $u$ and $v$ are in the same component (otherwise, clearly no path exits and the answer is $-1$). There are four main cases to consider:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compress this cycle into a single node. Each connected component is now a tree, rooted at the cycle node. Consider a query for a path from $u$ to $v$. Assume that $u$ and $v$ are in the same component (otherwise, no path exits and the answer is $-1$). There are four cases to consider:
```

> 1. If $u$ and $v$ are both located within the cycle, then there always a path between them. "Root" the cycle at a node within the cycle, and for each subsequent node, record the distance between that node at the cycle root. We can now process this kind of query in $\mathcal{O}(1)$ by subtracting the cycle distance information accordingly. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If $u$ and $v$ are both located within the cycle, then there is always a path between them. "Root" the cycle at a node within the cycle, and for each subsequent node, record the distance between that node at the cycle root. This kind of query can be processed in $\mathcal{O}(1)$ by subtracting the cycle distance information accordingly. 
```

2. If $u$ is in the cycle and $v$ is not in the cycle (ie in the tree), then there is no path between them. Nodes in the cycle can only reach other nodes in cycle via the edges. 

> 3. If $u$ is in the tree and $v$ is in the cycle, then there is an answer. If we traverse the edges from $u$ until we reach a node on the cycle, then we can reduce the problem to the first case. By itself, this method takes $\mathcal{O}(n)$ but we can speed it up to $\mathcal{O}(\log n)$ using techniques discussed later. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If $u$ is in the tree and $v$ is in the cycle, then there is an answer. By traversing the edges from $u$ until a node on the cycle is reached, this can be reduced to the first case. By itself, this method takes $\mathcal{O}(n)$ but it can be sped up to $\mathcal{O}(\log n)$ using techniques discussed later. 
```

> 4. If $u$ and $v$ are both on the tree, then it suffices to check if $v$ is an ancestor of $u$. Note that each node can only travel to edges that point towards the root. Once again, in the worst case naive solution this may take up to $\mathcal{O}(n)$ but we will speed it up to $\mathcal{O}(\log n)$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. If $u$ and $v$ are both on the tree, then it suffices to check if $v$ is an ancestor of $u$. Note that each node can only travel to edges that point towards the root. Once again, in the worst-case naive solution this may take up to $\mathcal{O}(n)$ but it can be sped up to $\mathcal{O}(\log n)$
```

> For the third and fourth case, one possible optimization is to use binary lifting. We can precompute the distance from the root to every node, and store it in each node. For the third query, we simply have to jump up by that distance (and add it to the answer). For the fourth case, we check if the node that is $\texttt{dis}(u) - \texttt{dis}(v)$ above $u$ is $v$ or not. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the third and fourth case, one possible optimization is to use binary lifting. Precompute the distance from the root to every node, and store it in each node. For the third query, simply jump up by that distance (and add it to the answer). For the fourth case, check if the node that is $\texttt{dis}(u) - \texttt{dis}(v)$ above $u$ is $v$ or not. 
```

#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

> int N, Q, cycle_len[200005];

Reviewer 2: 1. constant
2. no +5

struct node {
	int par[20], cycle_id = 0, dis = 0, vis = 0;
	bool cycle = 0;

> } nde[200005];

Reviewer 2: 1. see above
2. put that 20 in a constant
3. put the array decl on its own line
4. rename class to Node and array to nodes

pair<int, int> dfs(int u, int dfs_id) {
	if (nde[u].vis) {

> 		if (nde[u].vis == dfs_id) {  // cycle case

Reviewer 2: ctrl+f's cycle case in the editorial, nothing was there

Author: what does this even mean

Reviewer 2: it means you didn't explain what a cycle case was

			int v = u, d = 0;
			do {
				nde[v].cycle = 1;
				nde[v].cycle_id = u;
				nde[v].dis = d++;
				v = nde[v].par[0];
			} while (v != u);
			cycle_len[u] = d;
			return {0, u};
		} else {  // regular case
			if (nde[u].cycle) {
				return {nde[u].cycle_id, 1};
			} else {
				return {nde[u].cycle_id, nde[u].dis + 1};
			}
		}
	}

	nde[u].vis = dfs_id;

> 	auto t = dfs(nde[u].par[0], dfs_id);

Reviewer 2: don't use auto you lazy heck

	if (t.first == 0) {  // cycle case
		if (t.second == u) {
			return {nde[u].cycle_id, 1};
		} else {
			return t;
		}
	} else {  // regular case
		nde[u].cycle_id = t.first;
		nde[u].dis = t.second;
		return {nde[u].cycle_id, nde[u].dis + 1};
	}
}

int main() {
	cin >> N >> Q;
	for (int i = 1; i <= N; i++) {
		cin >> nde[i].par[0];
	}
	for (int i = 1; i <= N; i++) {
		dfs(i, i);
	}

	for (int k = 1; k < 20; k++) {
		for (int i = 1; i <= N; i++) {
			nde[i].par[k] = nde[nde[i].par[k - 1]].par[k - 1];
		}
	}
	

> 	auto lift = [](int a, int d) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	auto lift = [] (int a, int d) {
```
auto is fine here

Author: No space between capture and lambda
https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/lambda

Reviewer 2: i'll just believe you

		for (int i = 19; i >= 0; i--) {
			if ((d >> i) & 1) {
				a = nde[a].par[i];
			}
		}
		return a;
	};

> 	auto cycle_dis = [](int a, int b) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	auto cycle_dis = [] (int a, int b) {
```

#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

const int MAXN = 2e5 + 1;
const int LOGN = 20;

int N, Q, cycle_len[MAXN];

struct Node {

> 	int par[LOGN], cycle_id = 0, dis = 0, vis = 0;

Reviewer 2: put array declaration on its own line

	bool cycle = 0;
} node[MAXN];

pair<int, int> dfs(int u, int dfs_id) {
	if (node[u].vis) {

> 		if (node[u].vis == dfs_id) {  // cycle decomposition

Reviewer 2: you talked about this crap in the editorial right

Author: I don't understand how I did this

Author: I sort of glossed over it

Reviewer 2: bruh

			if (node[u].cycle) {
				return {node[u].cycle_id, 1};
			} else {
				return {node[u].cycle_id, node[u].dis + 1};
			}
		}
	}

	node[u].vis = dfs_id;
	pair<int, int> t = dfs(node[u].par[0], dfs_id);

	if (t.first == 0) {  // cycle decomposition
		if (t.second == u) {
			return {node[u].cycle_id, 1};
		} else {
			return t;
		}
	} else {  // tree decomposition
		node[u].cycle_id = t.first;
		node[u].dis = t.second;
		return {node[u].cycle_id, node[u].dis + 1};
	}
}

int main() {
	cin >> N >> Q;
	for (int i = 1; i <= N; i++) {
		cin >> node[i].par[0];
	}
	for (int i = 1; i <= N; i++) {
		dfs(i, i);
	}

	for (int k = 1; k < LOGN; k++) {
		for (int i = 1; i <= N; i++) {
			node[i].par[k] = node[node[i].par[k - 1]].par[k - 1];
		}
	}
	
	auto lift = [](int a, int d) {
		for (int i = LOGN - 1; i >= 0; i--) {
			if ((d >> i) & 1) {
				a = node[a].par[i];
			}
		}
		return a;
	};

	auto cycle_dis = [](int a, int b) {
		assert(node[a].cycle && node[b].cycle);
		assert(node[a].cycle_id == node[b].cycle_id);
		if (node[a].dis <= node[b].dis) {
			return node[b].dis - node[a].dis;
		} else {
			return cycle_len[node[a].cycle_id] - (node[a].dis - node[b].dis);
		}
	};

> 	while (Q--) {

Reviewer 2: bruh

		int a, b;
		cin >> a >> b;

		if (node[a].cycle && node[b].cycle) {
			if (node[a].cycle_id == node[b].cycle_id) {
				cout << cycle_dis(a, b) << '\n';
			} else {
				cout << -1 << '\n';
			}
		}

> 		else if (node[a].cycle && !node[b].cycle) {

Reviewer 2: *no.*

Author: oops

#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

const int MAXN = 2e5 + 1;
const int LOGN = 20;

int N, Q, cycle_len[MAXN];

struct Node {
	int par[LOGN], cycle_id = 0, dis = 0, vis = 0;
	bool cycle = 0;
} node[MAXN];

pair<int, int> dfs(int u, int dfs_id) {
	if (node[u].vis) {
		if (node[u].vis == dfs_id) {  // cycle decomposition
			int v = u, d = 0;
			do {
				node[v].cycle = 1;
				node[v].cycle_id = u;
				node[v].dis = d++;
				v = node[v].par[0];
			} while (v != u);
			cycle_len[u] = d;
			return {0, u};
		} else {  // tree decomposition

> 			if (node[u].cycle) {
> 				return {node[u].cycle_id, 1};
> 			} else {
> 				return {node[u].cycle_id, node[u].dis + 1};
> 			}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
			if (node[u].cycle) return {node[u].cycle_id, 1};
			else return {node[u].cycle_id, node[u].dis + 1};
```
#codecompress

Author: @SansPapyrus683

Author: back me up here

Reviewer 2: aadit i'm going to fill your stomach with rocks

		}
	}

	node[u].vis = dfs_id;
	pair<int, int> t = dfs(node[u].par[0], dfs_id);

	if (t.first == 0) {  // cycle decomposition

> 		if (t.second == u) {
> 			return {node[u].cycle_id, 1};
> 		} else {
> 			return t;
> 		}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		if (t.second == u) return {node[u].cycle_id, 1};
		else return t;
```
#codecompress

		return {node[u].cycle_id, node[u].dis + 1};
	}
}

int main() {
	cin >> N >> Q;
	for (int i = 1; i <= N; i++) {
		cin >> node[i].par[0];
	}
	for (int i = 1; i <= N; i++) {
		dfs(i, i);
	}

	for (int k = 1; k < LOGN; k++) {
		for (int i = 1; i <= N; i++) {
			node[i].par[k] = node[node[i].par[k - 1]].par[k - 1];
		}
	}
	
	auto lift = [](int a, int d) {
		for (int i = LOGN - 1; i >= 0; i--) {
			if ((d >> i) & 1) {
				a = node[a].par[i];
			}
		}
		return a;
	};

	auto cycle_dis = [](int a, int b) {
		assert(node[a].cycle && node[b].cycle);
		assert(node[a].cycle_id == node[b].cycle_id);
		if (node[a].dis <= node[b].dis) {
			return node[b].dis - node[a].dis;
		} else {
			return cycle_len[node[a].cycle_id] - (node[a].dis - node[b].dis);
		}
	};

	for (int q = 0; q < Q; q++) {
		int a, b;
		cin >> a >> b;

		if (node[a].cycle && node[b].cycle) {
			if (node[a].cycle_id == node[b].cycle_id) {
				cout << cycle_dis(a, b) << '\n';
			} else {
				cout << -1 << '\n';
			}
		} else if (node[a].cycle && !node[b].cycle) {
			cout << -1 << '\n';
		} else if (!node[a].cycle && node[b].cycle) {
			if (node[a].cycle_id == node[b].cycle_id) {
				assert(node[lift(a, node[a].dis)].cycle);

> 				cout << node[a].dis + cycle_dis(lift(a, node[a].dis), b) << '\n';

Reviewer: seems a bit longer than 80 characters

			} else {
				cout << -1 << '\n';
			}
		} else if (!node[a].cycle && !node[b].cycle) {

> 			if (node[a].dis >= node[b].dis && lift(a, node[a].dis - node[b].dis) == b) {

Reviewer: seems a bit longer than 80 characters lol

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/67491820/144756663-9776cd6a-2ced-48b2-b0d1-c581209b67aa.png)
There's no text wrapping in the code. 80 chars is not a hard limit
